Welcome to Future Histories, my name is Jan Gross and it is my great pleasure to welcome Tim Plattenkamp in today's episode.
Tim is a political theorist interested in democratic planning and republican thought.
He has written a forthcoming book titled The Constitution of Socialism, which will be the topic of our conversation today.
Before we start I would like to welcome Christina and Samuel as patrons of Future Histories.
Thank you so much for your support, it's highly appreciated.
And I would like to thank Lukas, Karl and Sascha for their kind donations.
And now please enjoy today's episode with Tim Plattenkamp on Republican Socialism, general planning and parametric control.
Welcome Tim.
Thank you so much. Thanks for the invitation.
So Tim, in your work you engage deeply with the planning debate as well as with republican thought in order to develop a feasible republican socialism.
Could you give us an overview of what you aim to achieve with your book?
Yeah, the primary aim was to basically formulate a realistic achievable socialism, so socialism achievable by actually existing people.
That's the bottom line.
And there's a little bit of a secondary element to it.
I wanted socialism also to be a little bit identifiable and recognizable to different strands of socialism.
So the entire, the primary aim was basically to formulate an achievable socialism that could materialize by the actions of actually existing people.
So that's the bottom line.
And in addition, there are secondary elements like I wanted the vision socialism to be identifiable and recognizable by different strands of socialism.
So, yeah, so it has to have a little bit in common with different elements of socialism so that maybe the more Leninist types could identify with it and maybe also people interested in democratic socialism.
So there's a little bit of, I don't want to say marketing, but a little bit of thinking about how you can make it a little bit more attractive to, I suppose, socialist activists.
So there's two elements to it.
The main thing obviously being that I wanted it to be achievable within a single generation.
I think this is my estimation, is that if socialists, maybe of different varieties, would come to power, would gain a majority, then I don't think many socialists know what they would have to do to achieve socialism.
This obviously has to do with the lack of debate in general.
There's obviously different visions, but these are quite niche.
So I wanted to basically tap into that.
So before we get to the specifics of your proposal, let's maybe set the scene by distilling some historical lessons.
You emphasize that there is a huge residuum of practical experiences and theoretical reflections as well about different forms of actually existing socialisms that one should engage with and learn from when thinking about socialist construction.
What are, in your opinion, the lessons one can learn from these historical experiments and the theoretical discourse surrounding them?
You know, the lessons are numerous.
I think I won't mention all of them.
There's, I think, a plethora of lessons to be learned, which I didn't initially see originally years ago.
I used to subscribe to this idea that was state socialism, right?
So how, as a socialist, would you learn anything from Soviet-style socialism when it's basically just capitalism rebranded?
So there was this growing awareness that, in fact, you could learn a lot from it.
I don't know what kickstarted this awareness, but it just grew over the years.
And some of the lessons I think that we can learn are, have to deal with the difficulty of setting prices, even of calculation in Natura, which the Soviet authorities used in their material balances, the enormous difficulty of processing enormous volumes of data, and the problem of obtaining reliable data in the first place.
So first you have to gather it and then digest it.
All of these are huge problems that a future socialism will have to deal with and that economists in these socialist countries try to deal with.
So for me, it was enormously illuminating to read their works and basically engage with their thoughts, because it's in that sense, it's very relevant to us as well.
Yeah, and we'll get to some of the insights that you distill from the theoretical engagement later on as well, namely when it comes to what is called Kosrachet.
I didn't know this word before, but we'll get to this one later.
I'm just curious, I mean, do you have a certain kind of focus?
So you engage a lot with what can be called a reform period within the Soviet Union, you engage with experiences from Yugoslavia as well.
But I mean, one could have added other historical examples in order to kind of enlarge the set of different modes of government, so to speak, the pool from which to kind of distill insights.
And I mean, some of the experiences that come to mind are anarchist practice or maybe commoning as well, which is a real life example for a different way of approaching these types of organizational questions.
This kind of seemed very much on purpose on your part that you focus on these experiments, but I was just wondering whether or not you kind of engaged with these other thoughts and experiments as well.
And if you think that there might be something to gain from them as well.
Well, the purpose behind looking mainly at Soviet style socialism and Yugoslavia, the main appeal for me has to do with them being stretching over a longer period of time and being more expensive, because a lot of problems that emerge are unintended consequences.
And these tend to show up at a little bit of a later point in time.
So if you look at the anarchist collectives, you do see cracks in the way they approached it.
And I have taken note of these experiments with anarchism.
But if you really want to evaluate them and draw the best possible lessons, I prefer to look at the larger, longer experience.
That's the short answer. And obviously we can learn from the anarchist collectives.
I think I mentioned it very briefly as an aside that the decentralization in the anarchist collectives, I'm talking about the Spanish Civil War, the anarchist collectives there led to inequality according to the resource endowments of different collectives.
And where this tendency was checked, it was done by a central authority of sorts, a committee of one type or another.
And this was the way that they checked sort of this capitalist syndicalism, as some critics would call it.
So we can look at these experiments and we can try to obtain lessons from them.
It's just my preference for the scope of this book was to foremost to check out the lessons that we could gauge from Soviet style socialism and Yugoslav marital socialism.
I'm kind of a little bit tempted to follow up and getting a little bit deeper into what the specific lessons from Yugoslav experiments and Soviet experiments were.
It might be interesting to have a little bit of a look at Yugoslavia because it was so different.
And one of the more interesting things I found was that the market socialism wasn't just free markets and they actually made an attempt at a sort of bottom up planning.
And before investigating more deeply the subject of Yugoslav market socialism, I wasn't aware of the experiment.
So I think maybe we can have a little detour into Yugoslav market socialism and the main lesson I think we can learn from that.
Great. Let's do it. So that's very interesting because bottom up planning, of course, is something that is very much relevant for the debate today as well, no?
Yeah. So if I can just give a brief outline of the broad attempt that they made basically had to do with breaking up firms into smaller associations to empower the workers.
So this was in the 1970s. They already practiced a form of worker self-management, as most people, at least most socialists would know,
but they noticed a tendency of power to creep into the hands of managers.
So the communist leadership decided we're going to break up these firms into smaller associations to empower the workers.
And we are going to expect them to formulate agreements amongst each other that have to be approved by local government committees.
So you see some elements of the current debate in democratic planning literature.
There's some common elements and a number of problems that arose during this experiment, one being excessive decentralization.
But for me, the more interesting thing was the lack of responsibility by, and this is a theme that comes up a lot in my book, that I stress a lot.
So one of the reasons that I thought maybe it's good to do a short detour to Yugoslav market socialism.
But basically, because these agreements have to have the stamp of approval from government authorities,
the workers didn't feel that they owed responsibility of the ultimate outcome.
And this led to a wasteful use of resources and general economic decline.
So for me, there was a huge lesson in there about the need to have a clear division of responsibilities.
And this is integrated into my outline, into my model, if you would like, if you will,
which I take inspiration from cybernetics about the need to have parametric control.
And this should ensure a clear division of responsibilities.
So for me, that was a huge lesson that you could learn from Yugoslav market socialism.
Could you explain a little bit more why there was this tendency to avoid responsibility?
Because you mentioned that you perceived it as a form of excessive decentralization.
And this would, in first thought, point in the opposite direction, where you would say, OK, if there is excessive decentralization,
then this would mean that there is more responsibility given to the decentralized actors,
to the kind of autonomous or at least semi-autonomous enterprises, socialist enterprises, so to speak.
So this would kind of point in the opposite direction.
So more in the direction of, OK, there is no way to act as if the center kind of dictated everything.
And therefore, I'm not responsible for the outcome.
Well, one of the effects of this decentralization reform was basically that a firm that you might consider some body was separated into individual parts.
So it led basically to arms and legs working against each other.
So a little bit more concretely, that might mean that one branch of this firm,
which is now basically an autonomous self-governing entity,
would be afraid that the benefits of their activity would be accrued by the other branch.
So it would stimulate sort of prefers like competition and a lack of cooperation,
whereas the intention behind the reform was exactly to promote cooperation
by ensuring that all these associations would enter into an agreement, a social pact,
and negotiate how best to achieve their common goals.
And instead, it led to a sort of particularism where each branch or each association would pursue their narrow interests at the expense of the larger interest.
Yeah, this I understand. But still, I do not really understand the connection to the question of responsibility there,
because the way that you described it right now, one could then say, OK, if you do your thing and do not coordinate with the others, then, of course, you are responsible.
So this does not really solve the responsibility question, even though I can see how this kind of bottom-up planning,
where everybody is acting on his or her own premise and doesn't coordinate is, of course, not what they were going for, I think.
Yeah. Well, the question of responsibility has more to do with the agreements having to be approved by some government authority.
So that caused the agreements to be influenced by the preferences of policymakers.
And when the outcome of these agreements, once implemented, would not be beneficial or perhaps lead to some losses in profitability,
the workers that are part of this agreement would protest and say, well, we have to make these changes.
Why don't you share as government in the responsibility?
And so it led to a sort of strategic game where any loss incurred would be the external responsibility of the government.
And the government didn't want to take responsibility because they're not a commercial business, basically.
So there's this strategic game of interest, which ultimately led to a decline of the entire economy.
OK. Maybe let's get to your proposal then.
So could you give us an overview of the institutional setup and the key elements and underlying organizational principles that make your Republican socialism work?
Maybe let's start with a political setup and then we later on move on to the planning mechanism,
while also being conscious of the fact that you very much emphasize that this is a kind of symbiotic interlocking, you say,
a symbiotic interlocking between the economic and the political sphere,
which I really liked to read because all too often within the planning debate,
some models kind of completely ignore the political sphere and simply provide some form of economic mechanism.
And that's it. So I really enjoyed that you push for this symbiotic interlocking.
And yeah, so this was really an interesting way to approach it, I think.
So maybe you could give us an idea of your approach because it's very much,
I think, centered around Republicanism and not everybody might know the content of Republicanism.
So maybe you could guide us through this political imagination that you sketch.
Yeah, sure. Republicanism isn't a coherent political ideology.
Republican thought has a sort of family resemblance based around a number of key values, key political values.
So that might be mixed government, freedom from domination, civic virtue, self-government.
And so it's quite malleable and not necessarily a coherent ideology.
And my reasoning for using Republicanism, civic Republicanism,
came from basically a thought experiment in what if we extend democracy all the way through,
which is the words of Chomsky in relation to anarchism.
What if we extend democracy in all scope and in every direction?
And as I try to work that through, I felt it wasn't really compelling.
I felt it would lead to a number of problems that I identified in the book,
some of which include that it would place too much of a demand on citizens to participate,
to be aware of all the policymaking, to monitor it and to deal with all these intricate details of policy.
And at the same time, this being organized by means of local assemblies,
which would therefore lead to a local outlook of the participants,
which is further reinforced by having the elected delegates from these local assemblies being tied to a mandate.
So they formulate their local views within a local context,
and then they bind their delegates to that local viewpoint.
So these are just some of the problems that emerged when we tried to basically extend democracy all the way through.
And as I was being exposed to Republican thought, particularly the idea of balanced government and constitution,
I found appeal in trying to not just extend democracy, but balance it.
So we can balance different democratic procedures in such a way that we decrease the demands placed on citizens,
and we can sort of avoid localism as well.
And that's the basic approach.
And my proposal is that this can be achieved by having bicameral legislatures.
So we retain some sort of local assembly.
The delegates are elected from these assemblies, are sent to one chamber in the higher legislative assembly,
and then the other half or so of the bicameral legislature is chosen by lot or certification.
And the delegates are under a flexible mandate.
So there's an element of representation as well.
And this has the benefit of the local viewpoints being transformed at higher levels rather than just transmitting the local viewpoint.
The idea of having people chosen by lot, delegates chosen by lot,
has to benefit that they will be a cross-section of the entire population of the region that they represent rather than local representatives with a local outlook.
And further, all this is done within a constitutional Republican system.
It's not a stateless society.
It uses a Republican form of government, including a constitutional framework.
So in very brief, that is the political outline of this Republican socialist model.
Maybe just to add for the listeners, when you spoke of the approach brought forward by Chomsky or the way that you outlined what you kind of termed extending democracy all the way through,
I think what you're talking about is a form of council democracy,
in which you have a form of pyramid scheme, so to speak, where you have different levels and each level kind of delegates the next person to a higher up level,
just maybe for the listeners as a context. That's what you kind of dissect within the book as well, no?
Exactly. Yeah.
Yeah, the idea that power flows from the bottom and you're organizing local assemblies and these local assemblies elect a deputy or delegates to higher levels instead of power flowing or downward.
That's the idea of basically libertarian socialism. It has some common ground with broader socialist thought.
That's basically the idea that I'm arguing against and that I contrast Republican socialism with.
And also another thing I might add, because I thought it was a nice feature of the Republican socialism that you described, is that the Constitution is not set into stone,
because that's something I was always wondering that if you have a constitution and like upcoming generations are born into this system,
they would have a kind of prefixed system in which they would have to interact.
And so you kind of introduce a temporal layer to this by saying that in every generation you would have to at least once debate and deliberate over the Constitution as well.
So I think maybe every 25 years, the whole society is saying, all right, how did it work out so far?
Do we like the Constitution or not? And maybe let's change something.
Exactly. So one of the reasons that I prefer constitutionalism and in that sense the rule of law is that the codes of conduct are transparent and in principle universal.
So that sort of checks the tendency towards a majority win.
So that's another element why I prefer Republicanism.
And then once you make that step, you have the risk, I suppose, of a Constitution that binds multiple generations to a single document.
And for that reason, I prefer it to see, and it's not a new idea, the Constitution as a living body and generation as being their own sovereign over their constitutional order.
But I elected to approach that by having each generation basically revisit the Constitution and allowing room for contemplative reflection on what sort of constitutional rights and duties do we want to live by.
And yeah, so it doesn't become sort of a mindless repetition of rights and duties. That's the basic idea.
And just because I'm curious, since I'm maybe a little bit more cautious when it comes to the role of the state, and I'm also interested in different approaches towards what you call the rule of law.
I'm just curious whether or not you ever came into contact with something like a law without force. In Germany, it would be a Recht ohne Gewalt.
Daniel Leuk is working on that. And since he's in Amsterdam, you might know his work. I'm not sure.
So I'm just curious whether or not you're engaged with these kind of different traditions, so to speak, that still engage with things that are very much important to you as well.
But from a very different angle. So there's anarchist constitutionalism, for example.
And there is, as I said, an approach towards law that tries to avoid the inherent violence within law and tries to kind of frame it, not frame it, but approach it from a different perspective in which it is not already a given that this violence is somehow justified or an inherent feature of law as such.
Well, my exposure to anarchist principles of law is basically mainly through Tom Holtermann, a Dutch scholar.
So I sort of engaged with him a little bit, but I'm not familiar with this principle of law without violence.
I haven't engaged with that particular variety of anarchist law.
Still, after considering the merits, I personally come to the conclusion that the Republican system is less vulnerable to arbitrary decision making and violence.
So that's where I end up in my argumentation and my engagement with anarchism is through Tom Holtermann.
Yeah, so he's an exponent also of libertarian constitutionalism, as he calls it, and voluntary law.
So there might be some overlap, but I'm not familiar with your particular principle of law without violence.
It's not mine. It's Daniel Leuchts, but this sounds interesting. I have to check out Tom Holtermann for sure.
OK, so I mean, I do have some questions relating to this setup as well,
but I think we can engage with them after we go through the planning mechanism because it kind of overlaps and touches upon questions of the subject and stuff like that.
So maybe let's take a deep dive first into the planning mechanism that you propose.
Could you outline the institutional framework and the core mechanisms and organizing principles you propose in what you call general planning and parametric control or short GPPC?
And maybe let's have an outline of the basic setup first and then we'll go through the different steps of what an actual planning process might look like.
So what are the different institutions and layers of planning in GPPC?
Yeah, so general planning and parametric control, by lack of a better term, to be honest, I struggled a little bit with a useful way to reference it.
This is what I came up with.
Well, I mean, I think it kind of worked because I had to think of David Leipman's multi-level iterative democratic coordination, which is kind of also a similar way to approach the naming question.
Yeah. But anyway, in terms of substance and not the name, there is a central planning board, which is authorized by the main legislative assembly and it determines the share of investment and therefore the share of consumption.
The division between how much do we accumulate and how much do we consume immediately and is responsible for setting prices according to the cost of production.
It has the responsibility of determining the relative price levels of different items, different resources, different assets.
It's not the responsibility of the markets or of producers.
Producers do determine cost but not prices, basically, and it's responsible for setting parameters to which producers respond.
So that includes and extends to the price levels themselves, which are parameters and production norms, basically.
So it might be norm of productivity, which sets benchmarks to compare and evaluate performance.
So that's the main responsibility of the central planners.
And to help the central planners, there's some intermediary bodies like planning offices that might be responsible for controls and audits or taking on some of the local and regional responsibilities of the central planners.
And, of course, production units themselves. So that would be mostly cooperatives and basically work collectives that produce output and use inputs and whose activities are shaped by the central norms.
That's the brief outline of this model.
OK, so how does the central planning board come about? Who's making the decisions there and why?
So this is the central planning board is ultimately authorized by the highest legislative assembly.
And so it's accountable to the main legislature and it's staffed by economists and specialists because it deals with highly technical tasks and functions.
So these decisions are mandated by the political authorities.
So it will give instructions to set the sharing investment, to set the parameters.
And these are further influenced by the social priorities that are formulated politically by this main legislature.
So if they decide that we are going to transition from one energy source to another, then the central planners have to take that into account when they set prices, for example.
So that is roughly the way that it would work.
And since prices seem to have a very important function within your proposal, how do the prices that the central planning board basically offering as parametric control?
How do these prices come about?
Well, I'm a little agnostic on the issue of where they come from exactly.
For instance, if we go by Marxist orthodoxy, then they would be set ultimately according to the cost of the reproduction of labor and I suppose the productivity of labor as well.
To be honest, I didn't really want to delve deeply into that subject matter because of the time constraints in dealing with this book itself.
To me, the priority was to give an outline of a feasible socialism.
And the determining of prices to me is feasible, even if it depends on whether we price according to the cost of labor or perhaps if we have some other idea of where prices come from, if that makes sense.
I don't know, to be honest, because I mean, that's kind of the central one of the central questions at stake.
I would say the question of how do prices come about, because that's basically what an important function of what markets provide is that they do provide a form of evaluation and valuation through the market.
And the medium of prices.
And so if we want to overcome markets, of course, the question of how prices are being formed is a very crucial one, I would say.
And I'm always curious whether or not people do think that there is a form of what might be called naturalized price.
Because I think that's kind of one of the fallbacks for many socialists is that they act as if there was a completely objective way of determining what then might be called a natural price.
I think that might tend towards this direction where they act as if accounting in labor time would be able to provide a naturalized objective price.
I'm always curious how people position themselves when it comes to this question, since it's kind of a central mechanism within any of these proposals and models, so to speak.
So that's why I'm kind of trying to push a little bit further when it comes to this aspect of the whole thing.
Well, in broad strokes, there are some considerations that the entire consumption cannot exceed the output of society, that we have to take into account the subsistence level of consumers.
Prices have to be set in relation to these factors, as well as the natural availability of resources.
But as I say, I'm a little bit agnostic about how marxistically we can approach the issue.
So I elected to not get bogged down into that discussion and leave that for some other time or some other place.
For the purpose of this book, I was satisfied with it saying we need to look at the cost of production and the relative cost and then anchor prices to those costs.
And maybe then let's get into the question of unit of account, which is, of course, related to that, because now we're talking about prices.
But I mean, the listener might imagine prices in fiat money if we talk about prices.
So that's not the way that it goes within your proposal.
So if you talk about prices, you talk about something entirely different, or at least maybe some might argue it's not entirely different, but you talk about different forms of units of accounts, so to speak.
Yeah. So in this model, there is basically an artificial point system.
So it's not currency that is being transferred from producer to producer or certainly not from consumer to producer.
The purpose of these points is to calculate the cost of certain assets or inputs, the relative scarcity, perhaps, and the benefits to households or consumers.
So let's say when a consumer decides to use their consumption points to acquire a certain item, the points are not transferred to the producer, which then uses it to acquire inputs.
Instead, the consumption is recorded as a score which tracks the performance of this producer in relation to their performance index, which includes how productive they are, whether they have an excess of supply or too much demand.
And it helps to keep track of those success indicators.
It's not the case that these points are then transferred and used as money to purchase inputs.
So that's the nuance and difference in pricing on this sort of model and regular prices as we know them today.
So I don't know how the prices come about within the central planning board, but they should kind of reflect the relative scarcity and the cost of production.
The central planning board announces these prices, which are, I think, prices not, of course, for an end product, but for intermediate goods, for production factors, factors of production.
They are announced in production points to the different socialist enterprises.
And what happens then? They then kind of bid against each other on how much they are willing to pay in terms of production prices for a given intermediate good, or is it the other way around?
I think it's the other way around, isn't it? It's that they say how much they can produce given a fixed price of a final product that they aim to produce, right?
Yeah, yeah. So initially the prices are given or announced, and then they formulate a plan and say, look, this is how productive we can use this asset.
And if it's more productive than some other alternative use, they will acquire them first.
And in the process of bidding, you might get adjustments based on those relative scarcities because the level of demand might call for an incremental increase in price.
So that's roughly how they would use their score, their rating, how well they performed and how well they say they're going to perform to acquire inputs.
OK, this I think we would have to explain to the audience because we didn't really get into this.
So there is a what you call score, which should express a certain type of efficiency within a given enterprise in terms of how effectively they are able to use the resources in order to produce a certain outcome.
So how does this come about, this score?
Well, yeah, if we take a small step back, then we have all these economic units, all these producers in the economy, and they formulate a plan in response to certain production norms.
These norms are set by the central planners, basically, and the important norms include the norm of net output so that you want to produce more stuff using fewer resources.
Ideally, this norm sets the benchmark for a sector, so it establishes a baseline of productivity.
It should be achievable, so the producers come up with a plan, and if it's a very ambitious plan, then it should at least be achievable.
So if by the end of the year it hasn't been achieved, they don't receive a good score, basically.
This is basically the Leibman reward function, which I've lifted from Leibman's multi-level iterative democratic coordination model.
And in it, there's a symmetrical penalty for over-fulfillment and under-fulfillment, because even over-fulfillment can be enormously disruptive if we end up with lots more stuff that we have to store and transport.
Unlike in Soviet socialism, if you over-fulfill, you receive a negative score, basically.
So according to such norms, the different enterprises, if you like, receive a rating that forms the basis also of their bonuses and possibly is tied to how much resources they can acquire.
Could you explain this last bit? So in which way is it tied to how much resources they can acquire?
So if they have a plan that is more productive compared to some other alternative use, then they get basically first priority, and they are able to acquire resources that others might not.
Some other enterprise that is inefficient might be discontinued entirely if they can't make productive use of their assets.
But this goes across sectors.
So this form of comparison in terms of how efficiently one was able to use resources should be a comparison that can be made between very different sectors and very different types of products that people are producing.
So it applies to identical products within a certain sector.
And the investment fund, the share of investment is channeled to different sectors where it's being allocated and distributed among different producers.
So there has to be an element of comparability as well.
Yeah, I mean, we're now kind of knee deep in technical questions, but I would still kind of try to push you a bit more on this one, because this would mean that actually the whole thing is kind of based on an idea of perfect competition, no?
So you would have to have a form of ideal competitive scenario in which socialist enterprises that are all producing the same product within a context that is the same, like the same machinery and the same amount of labor and stuff like that,
that you would have to have such an imagined ideal state of, I would say, maybe a bit provocative, perfect competition in order to then kind of derive what you call an average of productivity, so to speak,
which would then be able to serve as an evaluation mechanism against which the performance of a given enterprise can be measured.
So this, I think, is not very much a real life scenario, I would say, because the enterprises do have very different setups.
They have kind of different contexts in which they operate.
There might be a lot of reasons why a given enterprise might not be able to achieve the average compared to another one.
So I think it's not realistic to kind of derive the measurement, the value of measurement against which my performance is measured from this idea of an average, because you do not really have this perfect average to measure against, I would say.
Well, you don't obviously have producers with purely identical output, but you do have producers, at least some producers have the same types of output.
And you could, in that sense, make comparisons and even have sort of relative ranking over time.
So that is similar to, I suppose, what Kolesky proposed in relation to profit, so the change of profit over time and the change in the relative ranking over time of a certain enterprise.
So that then deals with the different contexts which producers find themselves in, meaning that if they have a technologically inferior workplace, then it's possible to track perhaps their relative position in these rankings of their sector.
So if they improve, that means that they have been more beneficial to society compared to where places that have improved less or even lowered in ranking.
But this is self-reported, isn't it? So the whole thing is based on the idea that there is not a hardcore mechanism of surveillance in place, but that the level of ambitious internal planning is defined by the enterprise itself.
That's something I really find curious about David Leibman's, what he actually calls collective morale function.
And I think the morale aspect of it that you kind of ditched in your phrasing of it is quite important for David, I think.
And I think there's the crux, so to speak, because the enterprises themselves define what is for themselves an ambitious goal, so to speak.
And if you do not want to kind of surveil whether or not they are providing this ambitiousness truthfully, so to speak, you would have to have a different kind of indicator.
That's why you introduced the averages, I think, no? And so if you have instead of the averages, a kind of comparison over time, then you would then fall back to the problem or quote unquote problem that this is self-reported.
So I can then kind of start with a very easily achievable ambitiousness and then make it easy for me to achieve the reported goals, isn't it?
Yeah, I suppose that because you inherent your position from the previous period that that effect is limited, though that is, I suppose, speculation.
It is self-reported. Obviously, the achievement itself is being tracked by a logistical control system.
And the reason I say relative ranking is because that if you have a relative ranking, it is different, I suppose, than if you have simply an absolute improvement or not.
Just to give you some background, I wrote a book chapter because I'm co-editing a book with Christoph Zorc on democratic planning.
And so I wrote a book chapter and in the book chapter, I also take a look at David Ledman's collective morale function.
That's why I kind of push further on that front, you know?
Yeah.
I think for the audience in order to get a bit more of a macro perspective on the whole thing, it would be important to sketch out what you describe as the three public sectors, because I think that's very relevant for the whole picture.
So you have these sectors which are called the collective sector, the administrative sector and the cooperative sector.
And each of them have different functions and they are also kind of organized in different ways and along different types of organizational principles.
So maybe you could kind of sketch what these sectors are and how they are being approached.
Yeah, so the names are only loosely connected to the industries that fall under this umbrella.
The collective sector includes basically public utility and infrastructure.
So there might be energy and things that are considered natural monopolies.
These have to be managed differently compared to, let's say, a cooperative bakery because it deals with a natural monopoly that has to be run directly for the benefit of society.
So that means that if we place it under the care of a workers council, they might sort of enrich themselves at the expense of society by producing less output or basically increasing the cost of maintaining their operations without also increasing the benefit to society.
So as a result, I propose that this should be managed as a sort of co-determination scheme where there is a workers council, but it's not the primary decision maker and there's more direct public accountability.
The same principle applies to the administrative sector, which includes public education and administrative overhead, so civil service as well.
And the key difference is that for the public utilities, there might be some nominal fees involved, whereas primarily in the administrative sector, services are free at the point of use.
The third sector, the cooperative sector, is basically where production is geared for individual household consumption, and that might be the easiest way to explain it.
And there the prices are connected to the cost of production and producers are supposed to recoup these costs on behalf of society, so they're not free at the point of use, and it involves basically individual household consumption.
And those are basically three sectors, and within the cooperative sector, the workers councils are primary decision makers, so they have direct influence over the course of their activities and within the parameters of the central planners basically.
And I was, to be honest, a little bit shocked to see that their care sector is missing, so there's no mentioning of the care sector in total, so to speak. So how would this be approached?
Well, the care sector would fall under the umbrella of administrative sector, so care branch falls under the administrative sector. Administrative meaning has more to do with the way it's being governed, I suppose, and the type of services that fall under it.
So different care, child care, health care is included in the administrative sector.
All right, so we will get to the question of remuneration later on, but that means that if the care sector is a part of what you call the administrative sector, and if you have schemes of remuneration in actually the whole model as a basic form of how you set up the question of
labor and maybe even subsistence. So if there is some form of remuneration within the cooperative sector, then of course the question arises if people are being remunerated for care work, which would take place in the administrative sector.
Yeah, there's remuneration in all sectors. There's no fundamental difference between sectors in that respect, so care work would be remunerated. I don't deal with it directly, but I would prefer that to a large extent it would be collective, so that even extends to child care, child rearing, being for a large part not exclusively collective and remunerated.
Now we have this setup of the three public sectors. There are different forms of how these sectors are being approached. So this gives us a total picture, so to speak, of the, let's say, resource throughput as well.
And then, of course, since we are all aware of environmental questions and problems that are imminent, would there be a cap in terms of total energy throughput or resource throughput, and how would this be kind of evaluated and enacted?
Yeah, I think ultimately it depends on the political priorities that citizens themselves decide upon. I think the benefit of having that decided by means of political instruments is that you first ask what the fundamental preferences of people are in relation to resource throughput or energy consumption.
Instead of, you know, compared to capitalism or currently where people make primarily decisions based on private considerations and from day to day. So you first ask them to sketch broadly their social priorities in legislative assemblies, and then ask them to make private decisions within that framework.
So the benefit of this should be that it generates more, for instance, ecologically inclined decision making and decision outcomes. And ideally that would include some cap on consumption of resources based on some estimation of their, of the amount available and
and substitutes that might become available in the future.
So there would be a political process that defines these caps, and then there's also a political process that decides over how many of these resources are being allocated towards which sector, isn't that right?
Yeah, so you first determine the share of investment, given the availability of resources, which might be artificially capped for ecological concerns, and then the share of investment is channeled into different sectors.
Yeah, right. Okay. And maybe also to get a sense of what this would mean in terms of my individual life within these settings. I mean, since you have these different sectors, and you also already mentioned that the administrative sector is basically free on use.
So I think here the question also arises if there is something like universal basic services and how far you imagine those to go if they exist.
So is there a form of unconditional existential security, so to speak, that is there for everybody to enjoy? And then on the basis of that, some form of remuneration and bonus scheme is being developed? Or do you imagine it otherwise?
I think your broad outline is correct. The services would be freely available with the minor qualification that enough resources should be available for the level of demand. So there might be a nominal fee, if that is preferred compared to rationing, right?
If there's a shortage of good services, you either ration them, or you introduce some nominal fee, or maybe a little bit of both. But they should be freely available. So that concerns the care services, education, and so on.
And remuneration, because it's a different sector, it's not tied to productivity per se. You might, if that is necessary, have that works amongst each other, elect someone for a special program that might be new consumer items that are being introduced, or perhaps bonus payments, because it's not the same sort of productivity and bonus scheme that you would have in the cooperative sector.
So you mentioned care sector, but is it that all of my existential needs are covered unconditionally? So do I have housing? Do I have food? Do I have public transport? Do I have internet? Do I have all these kinds of things that are in today's world, a part of what I need in order to take part in society in a meaningful way?
Do I have this on an unconditional basis?
I think some of those might fall under the collective sector. I think, for instance, housing even should be guaranteed. It should be guaranteed by means of pouring in enough resources to build housing for everyone and to have them available at a price that is affordable to everyone.
However, because there's such a difference in preferences and needs, I think it would still be better to have it under the collective sector. So there should be some fee in the housing sector to allow people to say, well, you know, I prefer to pay a little less on housing and to live a little bit smaller so that I can consume more of some other item that I prefer more to allow these preferences to be expressed in this way.
So personally, I would say housing plays that under the collective sector and then have education and health care freely available.
Okay, I'm also asking because forms of incentive schemes and bonuses and stuff like that play quite a crucial role within your model. And of course, the question of how much pressure, to be honest, lies behind these schemes is very much tied to the question of whether or not there is an unconditional universal basic service that takes care of all my existential needs or not.
And I think it quite crucially creates a different form of compulsion when you kind of withhold existentially needed elements of subsistence, so to speak, in order to more or less pressure people into work. So I'm kind of pushing towards this aspect and question of the whole thing. Is there a compulsion to work?
Yeah, I would say there is a there is a compulsion. I think, you know, in the book, I labor under the assumption that this is the first generation of people living under socialism. And the idea of these bonuses include that well, there's another assumption of labor, including mundane tasks.
So necessary labor that has aspects that are mundane or perhaps not very pleasant. And that's on account of inheriting the technology, the level of technology and productivity of the current world, basically.
And on that account, it would be necessary, in my estimation, that people who are willing to contribute to the greater good, to the greater whole, who are one to harness sort of innate motivation to further reinforce those motivations by material means or by compensating them for basically their sacrifice or their efforts in contributing to society.
So in that respect, there is a compulsion that you should supply labor to society in order to consume if you are able. And that is simply because we cannot consume more than we produce. So there should be some pressure to contribute to social production.
Okay, so far, we have learned that there is a like political mandate, the political mandate kind of defines the scope of how much is being produced in total. So you have then different sectors, you have three sectors, one is a public sector, one is a administrative sector, and one is the corporate sector.
They have different logics inscribed with them. And the planning mechanism that you describe is mostly focused actually on the cooperative sector. So that's more or less the main focus that you have within your book when it comes to this planning mechanism.
Maybe before we look at how these plans come about, do you think that focusing so much on the cooperative sector, it relates to the kind of percentage of how much of the total throughput is going into this sector?
So is it in that regard, like the most important one or in terms of throughput? Or is it just that the other logics kind of are more easily described than the one that you go for with the cooperative sector is a bit more complicated. So you will need to have more time distilling the organizational paradigm behind that, so to speak.
Yeah, most of it has to do with, to a large extent, we know how to run public education without profit motive. And there's different approaches, obviously, that have been tried or being tried in healthcare and how to measure success or productivity, much more in Natura by looking at how many patients you've treated and so on.
So for me, it was more interesting and more complicated to look at how we could have an efficient cooperative sector or to replace basically private sectors. So that was the main reason, not so much the throughput being, I think might be evenly distributed, in fact, among these sectors.
Okay, so maybe then let's take a closer look at the planning process. There are different elements to this. Of course, there are different plans. There are one-year plans, there are five-year plans, there are long-term plans. And then there is an inherent logic that you try to apply towards this cooperative sector, which makes it, in your view, kind of unique in this way.
And this is an idea of, I would say, full-cost accounting, which you call Costa Ratchett. And this idea of full-cost accounting is being applied to the cooperative sector. So maybe let's start by laying out these different plans, and then we can go into why you think that Costa Ratchett is the right way to go.
So to give a brief overview, producers or the workers councils would make some combination of inputs based on the cost of their production and in reference to the production norms that are supplied by the central planners. We mentioned some of them previously.
So based on that, they formulate a production plan for a year. The cost of their inputs, at least some of them, will be influenced by the political priorities about, for instance, energy consumption, because if we use less energy, then it will be more costly and it's more prudent that we use energy efficiently in the interests of society and that we don't waste it and so on.
So these input prices are influenced by the political priorities and then producers formulate a production plan of the amount of equipment, labor, and so on that they will use. And it's the task of the central planners to anchor prices to cost of production.
And in this way, the producers are supplied with basically independent parameters that they can use to estimate what it costs to society to produce a certain item and what the benefit to society is.
So that's the basic idea. And these production norms are the norm of net output, that it's better to produce more using less, that it should be achievable, and that there shouldn't be an excess of supply or demand.
That would be wasteful as well. And given these basic success indicators, we can track the performance of producers using modern digital technologies and logistics and control, can track the flow of resources and obviously make adjustments from there.
Both producers and central planners might make adjustments based on this new information, so sort of a cybernetic element to it. And yeah, as I mentioned, the pricing also has to do with the political priorities.
So if we increase the share of investment that influences the price of certain investment goods, for example, so this is how the annual plans and the larger political priorities come together. So it's by means of this sort of price mechanism.
And I mean, an aspect that is really important for you, you also mentioned it before, is this idea of responsibility. So it's very important for you that you have these cooperatives, these socialist enterprises to be responsible for their actions in order to not engage in, I don't know, wasteful behavior and kind of use the resources.
Efficiently that they are using. So in order to bring this idea of responsibility about, you refer to this idea of Kosrachet. Maybe you could describe to us what this means, where you got it from and how people can and should, in your opinion, can and should stick to Kosrachet.
Yeah, yeah, it's basically a Soviet term. So Kosrachet, the best translation is not a direct translation, I believe, it's basically full or cost accounting. And it comes from the early Soviet period. And basically, the reason that I use this term instead of just cost accounting is to emphasize that we are dealing with abstract reality, but reality, nonetheless, is not a direct translation.
In the sense that these were real dilemmas faced by real people in certain real circumstance of constructing socialism. So I just like to use that term to emphasize this idea. Yeah, that is a real challenge hidden within this debate about constructing socialism.
And more substantively, it means that each economic unit has a cost account, so it's responsible for the cost that they make, that these costs are recorded and available, and that we can compare their costs to the results of their activity.
And then finally, that we can have responsibility for these costs and these results. So if we lack any of these factors, it would not be possible to assign responsibility and ensure that workers are invested in the outcome of their activities.
So that's for me is why it's so important that we want workers to be invested in the outcome being beneficial to society, and not for them to consume resources without adding anything useful to their community.
So on that account, I found it important to emphasize this point, as well as that it's a dilemma that has already been faced previously, and that we need to take, obtain these lessons and digest these lessons for the future.
What was really interesting to me is that, I mean, when it comes to the political sphere, you kind of go a different route, more or less, because there you also argue that it would be important for people to kind of identify themselves with the collective aspects of society and not only retreat into an individualism, so to speak.
If one would want to be polemic, then one might say that in the public sphere, you use education and in the economic sphere, you use a form of diamond punishment.
So the way in which you try to achieve that people are not only being quote unquote selfish, but do consider the collective aspects of a societal organization, so to speak.
So the mechanism within the economic sphere is very much oriented towards this idea of economic punishment and incentivation.
So I was wondering why focus so much on this aspect?
I would even say this is more or less the only tool that you use within the economic sphere in order to provide for this identification with the more macro and collective aspects.
And I would be curious if you thought about alternative ways through which this identification with the collective aspects of my own doing could be brought about.
Because I'm personally actually quite skeptical of the idea that these types of mechanism design that ultimately treat the subjects through a very primitive mechanism of diamond punishment will result in what you intend it should result in.
Well, it's not not purely the only mechanism is an important, I suppose, mediating factor, but the production norms are also used to ensure that workers of different collectives or production units will basically negotiate the setting of output targets amongst each other.
So it's not to compete for a market for the largest market share.
So there is an element of the production norms encouraging a larger, broader outlook.
Sorry to interrupt, but how? I don't actually see it.
How are the different enterprises in your model incentivized to really coordinate horizontally with each other and kind of share information and work with each other towards a shared goal?
Well, they one element is that their plans have to be realistic.
So they have to communicate to each other their productive capacity and their ability to absorb, let's say, increase in demand, because if they fail to do so, then a plan that seems realistic might not be.
So there's this mutual interest to share reliable data on your productive capacity on your plans for output.
So that creates an incentive to share information about changes in plans and whether it is even possible for some production units to increase production if they lack the inputs of another manufacturer.
So there is an incentive there to share information in addition to production plans being publicly available.
So in addition to having their own innate incentive, there is also public scrutiny itself.
Yeah, so that's, I think, the main, main, main way that you could achieve cooperation in those areas.
So setting of output targets to prevent overproduction.
So if they estimate that demand for a certain group goes up, they have to coordinate, say, well, we can each increase production by this amount to absorb the increase in demand rather than just decide for themselves.
We're going to carve out the largest market share and aggressively coin in the market.
So there is the element of horizontal coordination there.
Okay, interesting, because, I mean, this I can see, and I really like the idea, actually, that you aim for overcoming a certain idea of competition between horizontal actors as well.
But there seemed to be an element of competition nonetheless.
So I would be interested in getting into that as well.
So, I mean, one example would be that I was asking myself that if a socialist enterprise finds a good way of producing a given use value more efficiently,
then what would be the incentive for this socialist enterprise to share this information with the other enterprises that are also producing this specific use value?
Because if they didn't share it, it would be much easier for them to fulfill the average within this specific industry sector.
So that might be an incentive not to cooperate and not to share this information.
So I was quite curious on this relationship between competition and corporation, because it seems as if both kind of seems to have a place within your model, no?
Yeah, yeah. So there's an element of horizontal cooperation, as I mentioned, dealing with output targets.
When we're talking about productivity and being more efficient, then there's an element of competition.
And the reason why there's an element of competition is because we don't know, from a central vantage point, we don't know the real production possibilities, right?
It is the basic problem of central planning. So then competition becomes the element by which we might gauge the benchmark of productivity.
And the way that it would deal with your example depends a little bit on how this work collective has managed to increase their productivity.
If it's purely by changing the organizational form, it would be difficult to sort of compel them or impel them to share that publicly.
But on the other hand, if they use a certain type of equipment, then that would be publicly available information.
So you might not prevent there's some strategic approach to increasing your own score, but you can sort of check it, at least in the area of using certain equipment, because you can see the combination of inputs that they use.
In addition, Leibman, I think, suggests that you could encourage these producers to share the information, their best practice, and reward them for it.
So that might be another option. And it might be possible if they can't figure out how they've grown so productive, it might be possible to send out a research team subject to the observation effect, which you wouldn't prevent it entirely to have strategic decision making like this, where you sort of conceal some of the strategic information, but you can minimize it, I suppose.
So we would have a central planning board that mainly operates through parametric control in the form of fixed prices.
So this is more or less the framework in which highly autonomous, but not fully autonomous socialist enterprises operate.
They do not have the ability to change prices, but they do have the ability to change the amount of output they are able to net output they are able to produce on the basis of these prices.
So this is this might be fluctuating. These enterprises are being evaluated in terms of how much net output they are being able to produce, given a certain set of inputs that they can attain.
And this is measured against a type of average within their own sector, so they can be given a certain score of success, so to speak, which is able to show how well they have done in terms of an efficient use of resources tied to this score.
They will get a form of bonus if they did well, and they will get a, I don't know, maybe let's say normal remuneration that does not provide a bonus if they did not so well.
If they just did something, if they did it really, really, really bad, it might be that they will not get any resources the next time.
So that is kind of the overall setup, so to speak. You have a vertical axis where you have mainly fixed prices as a parametric control.
You have horizontal coordination between the different enterprises that is both based on cooperation as well as on competition.
So you will have both of these elements, and there is a certain type of pressure, so to speak, that is on the shoulders of the enterprises that they should do kind of reasonably well in their production.
Otherwise, they will go down basically. So something that is sometimes called hard budget constraints, I think.
So that would be kind of the overall sketch, and then we saw that there are one-year plans which are mostly done through the enterprises.
So there is a kind of bottom-up planning element to this where based on these parametric information, the prices, the fixed prices, so the enterprises devise one-year plans where they announce what types of resources they will need.
There is also an aspect of a more detailed one-year plan, I think. If I remember correctly, at least for the upcoming month or something, you would have to provide a more detailed aspect.
But there are also five-year plans which are, correct me if I'm wrong, politically negotiated, so to speak, and which kind of provide an orientation in terms of general outlook of the economy.
Do we want to go into green energy more? Do we kind of have less energy throughput overall and stuff like that?
So this is kind of handled politically, so to speak, and then you would have really long-term planning as well, which I think we didn't really touch upon yet, no?
Are you satisfied with my sketch?
Yes, certainly. Yeah, we skipped a little bit the month-to-month planning and also a longer term as well.
Yeah, even the five-year plans are guidelines. It might be a little bit too much to say that they're plans as such.
They form guidelines within which plans are formed and even longer perspective plans are moving average of those plans, basically. So they're given sort of a long-term orientation.
Obviously, the more long-term you plan, the less reliable it becomes. So it's just a point of orientation for policy making and political decision making.
But related to that, I mean, this would be something different than, for example, the notion of investment steering within the model of Pat Devine, for example.
Because I remember in your book, you kind of say that you think that the idea of political control over investment is not what you aim for, but that this should still be the responsibility of the semi-autonomous enterprises.
If I understand you correctly, then there would be an element of direct control of investment where it relates to the collective sector, especially obviously the administrative sector as well.
An energy transition would require a more hands-on approach by public authorities. So then I suppose there would be more direct control of energy infrastructure as well, if I understand your question correctly.
Yeah, maybe let me rephrase this, put it a bit more clearly. Of course, for the public sector and for the what you call administrative sector, it's clear to me that you do have political control over investment in these spheres.
But then there's the cooperative sector and within other models, for example, within Pat Devine's model, he stresses very much that a political control over investment would be an important way of steering the direction of the economy, so to speak.
So what in your model is mainly done through fixed prices and parametric control would in his model be done through very decisive political decisions over investment allocation.
But if I understand it correctly, that in your model within the cooperative sector, the enterprises themselves would decide over these questions of investment and there would be a, so to speak, cumulative aspect to this idea of where investment should go or where it shouldn't go.
So this is a difference to the other models, so to speak.
Yeah, I think so. I think your assessment is correct in that. I think the best way to achieve that in an incentive compatible way is more indirectly via parametric control by reshaping sort of the infrastructure or the parameters rather than directly and direct negotiation or direct decision making.
Okay, so we have a picture of some of the macro elements, but I think it would be good to relate it to questions of similarity and difference to a capitalist mode of production.
Because what I really liked about the way that you approach it is that you aim to overcome certain aspects of a capitalist mode of production, namely things like the profit motive and the value form, stuff like that.
But at the same time, hearing about the model, one might say, okay, there's still remuneration, there's still a compulsion to work, there are still ideas of the separation of a sphere of production, a sphere of reproduction.
So many of the elements that we see today and that are also being criticized, for example, coming from a feminist perspective, but also coming from other perspectives, for example, value form theory, who are very much pushing towards overcoming certain central elements of capitalism.
So other elements you do not overcome within your model.
And I was wondering how you reflect upon this, I don't know, this kind of gradual or maybe gradual overcoming or this necessity to engage with certain structural logics that we see today and that should arguably be overcome.
Yeah, so it has to do, I think, with my primary priority being flashing out socialism that is feasible now.
In addition to abstracting away certain discussions and themes in the interest of time, I was also focused on those issues, which I thought would first emerge when you start to construct a post capitalist society.
So for me, those questions of attaining efficiency and ensuring that at least partially selfish people can be rendered into service of the public interest and socialism, how we can design mechanisms that fulfill these tasks.
For me, that was the priority. So to an extent that explains this particular focus, as I mentioned, it's the idea that this would be the first generation living on socialism.
And so you do inherit certain tendencies and a separation of certain spheres. And the idea is to overcome some of these barriers and figure out as well along the way, the best way to approach those things.
So talking about the separation of leisure and production, I think it's basically best to leave those issues for a later stage of development and for now focus on what we can achieve within a single generation.
I mean, I think one of the inherent questions that come up with such an approach would be that it sounds as if it might run the risk of by reproducing certain logics of government, so to speak, certain logics in which the subjects are being addressed.
By reproducing these logics, you kind of inhibit that which is needed in order to overcome what you think of as a first stage or whatever.
So you might not come to the later stage if you approach it through such a paradigm, because it basically doesn't succeed in stepping out of addressing people in a certain way that is suspicious of their ability, basically.
But at the same time, the whole thing would kind of strive towards basing itself on this ability.
So there's an inherent contradiction in terms of how the model makes use of certain mechanisms and how it articulates a goal that lies beyond these mechanisms themselves and the logic that is inscribed within them.
Yeah, I think there is such a risk in the sense that by abstracting away this potential future stage, you sort of materially reinforce those tendencies that you want to curb in effect.
And again, that is basically the consequence of the focus that I elected to adopt, basically to test the waters of, given the assumption of soft egoism, what are the necessities that arise when you construct a model of socialism.
And it's certainly something that, you know, in further interrogation and scrutiny, one would have to address if it's possible for these sort of mechanisms of material reinforcement and bonuses if they wither away or if they reinforce these tendencies.
But for now, again, my focus lies with testing the waters of what is feasible now under these assumptions, and later possibly we can reevaluate those assumptions as well.
And would you say that these assumptions are assumptions of economism and productivism?
Well, to an extent, I think the assumptions are at least partially valid. So for instance, it is productivistic, this approach, but I think that that is a necessary element also of trying to have a society that is more efficient because ultimately you don't want to produce fewer things with more effort,
which goes at the expense of leisure and quality of life, because you're not just talking about useless stuff with also medical equipment and tools for improving the welfare of people.
So in that sense, I do want to defend a little bit those assumptions that lead to this sort of productivistic approach, that it is important to have a high degree of efficiency and so on.
Yeah, so to that extent, I do want to defend those assumptions at least.
Yeah, I mean, I guess at the end, it might be a question of what you prioritize. So I'm quite sure that none of the people engaged in the planning debate would argue that efficiency is irrelevant.
So that's something everybody's kind of aware of, of course, also with regard to the ecological question and that we should not kind of excessively blow our resources into the air, whatever, or consume them senselessly.
So efficiency, of course, is an aspect that we need to consider, but maybe the role it plays or how much you kind of build your whole model or system around the optimization of efficiency might be up for discussion.
And there might be different approaches that at the end might lead to results that could be equally compatible with the reproduction of our ecosphere, so to speak, but do not start from a perspective of efficiency as the highest priority.
So I think there are different modes that one could devise and different also modes of relating to these questions that are not coming primarily from questions of efficiency, but still are able to lead to desirable outcomes, so to speak.
I would like to also get into the question of the subjects that you imagine, because this was really a crucial element within both the political aspect of your model, as well as the economic aspects of your model.
And I was kind of a little bit irritated by this notion of the subject because it has a very, very strong normative notion to it.
And it to me seemed to be a very small corridor that is being allowed as a quote unquote good subject.
So there is a certain idea of what an ideal political subject is in republicanism.
And this is also a very active subject and a subject of participation, a subject of self mastery, I think you call it at some point.
And this was kind of irritating to me because for me at least a polity or a demos should consist of a whole variety of different subjectivations that do not necessarily need to conform to such an idea of self mastery and activity in order to be resourceful for the community as a whole.
I would argue. So it's not just these active subjects that do contribute to society, but subjects that have very, very different qualities than this ideal republican subject, at least in my books, very much of worth for the community as well.
So I was kind of struck by this very, very idealized subject that you aim for in the political sphere and as well in the economic sphere, because it comes up there as well.
Yeah, it's certainly something that I've inherited, I think, from republicanism, the idea that humans are in that sense a social animal, require participation in public life to acquire those tools of self mastery through active participation.
And I think that's, I should say, a bit of a strong normative commitment to make, although I would admit that being resourceful and being active in public life allows for a huge variety in itself, whether you participate in a recreational club or something else, or whether you serve public office.
So even this sort of active participation in public life would allow for a variety of ways to, I suppose, participate in public life.
So it is a strong normative commitment, but I don't think that the corridor is as narrow as you say. There's a variety of ways that you can participate in public life.
Underlining this is the idea that social animals, it is important that we participate in public life.
And I mean, there's a kind of fishy aspect to it as well when it comes to the question of how you think that this could be achieved for everybody.
So, I mean, my argument would be that not everybody conforms to this ideal and for a good reason.
And if your argument is, well, everybody should, then my question is, how do you get them to do so?
Well, I suppose it begins with the institution of public education and collective child rearing, where people are socialized in norms, not even necessarily directly.
It doesn't have to be specific values, just participating in class and so on with the provision of full employment to have the expectation that everyone was able to contribute to social production.
And that sends you harness the, I suppose, the innate want of most people, I suppose, with some exceptions to be sociable and to contribute to a greater whole beyond themselves.
And again, that might assume a variety of forms, including that it might extend to religious participation or whatever else that they might prefer is allowing them the resources to participate in collective life from very early on.
Yeah, I mean, if you stated that way, I think we're not that far apart.
Because if the premise is that you should give people the resources to take part in collective life, then of course I'm on board.
So that's a good thing. I guess the difference might be in nuance when it comes to how much I would push people towards this very specific idea of activity and participation and how they should act in accordance with Republican values.
I would allow for more slack, I guess, when it comes to that as well.
Well, I think there is a sort of pessimism also in what I expect, the amount of people I expect to participate in political life, for instance.
So it's not entirely that I have a strict sense of what an idea of Republican citizen is.
And there should also be some option to opt out even of work, although I think there should be some moral obstacles in the way of that.
Oh, but that's interesting because one could also frame it coming from a very different perspective, stating that in order for your Republicanism to work,
you need a certain amount of a specific type of human material, so to speak, and therefore you kind of need to bring about these individuals in order to make the whole thing work.
And it's coming, but this is coming from the opposite direction.
That's not coming from the direction of the individuals, but it's coming from the direction of an ideal, abstract ideal of what a political community should look like.
And then it goes to asking what kinds of subjects you need in order to make this ideal work.
So that's a bit of a funny take.
I suppose, I suppose.
OK, so you focus very much on the theoretical development of Republican socialism in order to provide a better idea of what it is that the socialist movement, at least in your opinion, should strive for.
How does this relate to our praxis today?
And how can these two be brought together, this idea of a socialist Republicanism or Republican socialism and our contemporary present?
So how do you think about the transition, basically?
Well, I haven't fleshed it out in detail.
I hope to in the future have some time to contemplate this a little bit more deeply, so I can only tell by broad strokes how I would approach the transition.
And I think it would proceed from broad coalition.
So to have some reformity within the broader socialist movement that might appeal to different segments of the working population.
So that stems then from an entirely different approach of what we might call neogrammatism, that there's not necessarily unitary interest of the working class.
So we need to appeal to different layers and segments in different ways.
And one of them being Republicanism and appealing to those elements within the working population that might be, I suppose, open to those ideas.
So just to have a broad palette of flavors, I think that is probably how I think the issue should be approached of building a counter movement, basically.
And Tim, there's a last question that I ask all of my guests, and it is, if you think about the future, what makes you joyful?
It makes me joyful. Well, I suppose in the area of politics is the opening up of this debate.
The reason that I decided to delve deeply into this subject was sort of the lack of debate on the issue.
There were some, obviously, but I'm noticing, and maybe it's because I'm participating myself,
but I'm noticing more people becoming involved and interested in these questions.
So in that area, certainly is optimistic, cautious, cautiously optimistic, because it is a very difficult subject and will require a lot of work and fleshing out before we have maybe a satisfactory model in full.
But I suppose that that would be my source of joy in that area.
Perfect. Tim, thanks so much for being part of Future Histories.
No problem. Thank you.
That was our show for today. Thanks a lot for listening.
If you want to support Future Histories, you can do so on Patreon.
For this, visit patreon.com slash future histories, or you can simply tell a friend that you like the show and that he, she or they might like it as well.
Thanks a lot and hear you in two weeks.